Now, we're moving on to deadlifts. And
this is my favorite deadlift accessory
exercise that I perform. It's one of
those ones that kind of just fixes every
single part of the deadlift. Before I do
my deadlifts, I'm going to give you a
bit of a recap on my rehabilitation. If
you didn't know, two weeks ago from
today, I tore my quadricep attempting a
270 kg squat. And the last few weeks, I
have been in a bit of pain. So, my squat
work is now my killing two birds with
one stone. It's my warmup for my
deadlift session. Uh last session I was
only able to squat 80 kg for sets of
five. So the plan is to do 100 kg for
three sets of five. The way that I do it
is if the first set is fine, I might add
a little bit of weight. Uh but I don't
know yet. So this is going to be my
first set. Uh it should be kind of
painfree. Uh but my quadricep, great
news, it's getting a lot better and not
ready for heavy squats yet. Uh but in
that time, the way that I do this is
squats are a great warmup because it's
not very heavy. Squats are a great warm
up for my deadlifts. So, I'm killing two
birds with one stone. This is actually
my main quad rehab work. Um, but it's a
great warm up for my deadlift session.
So, first set, high bar squats. I'm
choosing high bar with elevated heels
because that targets the muscle. So,
when it comes to rehabilitation, there's
always different rules depending on the
injury, but for minor muscle tears, I
like to target the exact muscle instead
of avoid it. So the way that I target it
is high bar squats with elevated heels
to make me use the exact muscle that I'm
trying to repair. So set one, five reps,
100 kg.
Great. That felt
um better than what 80 kg felt a couple
of days ago. So therefore, I'm going to
slowly slowly add weight. So I'll do 110
next and see how that feels.
I think that's good enough for me to add
weight and do 120 kg on the next set. Uh
I'll tell you something else that I'm
focusing on is uh when I squat when
everything is fine and I'm trying to
lift heavy, I'm a little bit more
explosive on the concentric portion of
the lift. So I I push really fast. So
right now I'm not pushing as fast. So
that decreases the amount of tension
being placed on the muscle.
So if I was to push really fast, it's
actually 110 kg, but it's actually um a
lot heavier when you is if it's a very
light weight and you jump as high as you
can, uh that's equivalent to a lot more
weight than whatever you're actually
lifting. So, that's something else that
I always do if I'm trying to
rehabilitate a specific muscle is when I
do my contractions, I'm not as forceful
as what I normally would be uh when I'm
actually training for strength. So,
yeah, I'm good enough to do 120 kg and
that'll be my last set.
Good. That felt equal to or slightly
less painful than what 80 kg felt like a
couple of days ago. So, I'm very happy
with that. Three sets of five are done.
And now I'm moving on to deadlifts. Now,
we're moving on to deadlifts. And this
is my favorite deadlift accessory
exercise that I perform. It's one of
those ones that kind of just fixes every
single part of the deadlift. If you have
a weakness off the floor, performing it
off the deficit increases that range of
motion overloads that range of motion
and therefore gets it stronger. But
something else that a lot of people
don't really think about is having a
strong deadlift from the floor
strengthens the movement all the way
through, even up until the lockout. One
of the biggest things that I used to be
a culprit of is failing deadlifts at the
lockout. And a lot of people assume
what's the last part of a deadlift? It's
hip extension, right? So, we need to
strengthen the hip extensors, which are
mainly the glutes. So, a lot of people
do a lot of glute work and then they or
even rack pulls. And then they come back
to the deadlift off the floor and they
fail at the exact same point. So, why is
this? Well, if you're doing rack pulls,
you're starting in a different position
to what you would if you're off the
floor. What happens when you're
deadlifting off the floor and you're
being pulled out of position? This is
where you'd start a rack pull from. But
you wouldn't start like this. That's how
you look when you're pulled out of
position and then you fail the lockout.
Now, your thing is a lot of people blame
it on the glutes, but the the glutes
have done their job. What hasn't done
their job is the upper back strength to
maintain that position. So what happens
is the hips are locked out but now we
have to lock out the spine erectors the
the thoracic extensors to stand with a
straight back. So what's the solution to
this is do not get pulled out of
position from the floor. How do we do
that is we increase the strength from
the floor. And this is my favorite
exercise the pause deficit deadlift. So
let's have a look. So the size of the
deficit I'm choosing a higher deficit
today. Uh, and I would say as you get
closer to competition, you want to be
doing pure specificity.
But the deficit that I would use for
most people is a smaller deficit. So
just a little bit. And the objective is
to deadlift.
So So lift the weight just the height of
the deficit. So for this one, it's a
little bit longer, but anyway. So you
lift it just the height of the deficit.
Pause here. And then stand. Right? So
the reason why we go just the height of
the deficit is because when I deadlift
off the floor without the deficit,
that's the exact range of motion that
I'm strengthening. Right? So, so you
pause just the height of the deficit.
The next thing, so it's increasing time
under tension at that exact point where
we want to strengthen. The next thing is
the execution of that. So there's one of
the biggest problems, one of the biggest
reasons that people
fail their deadlifted lockout or get
they get pulled out of position is they
don't know how to stay tight off the
floor. A lot of the times this comes
from, you know, ripping the bar off the
floor, being too aggressive, which is
something that's that's widely taught is
bang grip and rip technique,
which has its merits. However, the
downfall is if you don't have an
understanding of maintaining tension off
the floor, that's what causes you to be
pulled out of position. So, the
execution here, the way that I like to
teach people this is the way that we
lift the bar off the floor isn't with
aggression. So, don't rip it off by
pulling it off the ground. The way that
we initiate the movement is by
exaggerating. Take, you've heard of the
term, take the slack out of the bar. We
exaggerate the way that we do that. So,
watch me now. So the way that I get into
this position is I pull my armpits. So I
reach my arms down and then armpits
towards my pelvis. So reaching down does
a lot of great things. It makes the arms
longer and you travel less distance. But
when you reach down, you should do it at
home while you're watching. Reach down
and you'll feel these muscles around
here. You'll probably feel your pecs,
but also your lats are contracting. So
that's a lat action. But then also
armpits towards the pelvis is another
that's shoulder joint extension. So
that's another action of the lats.
Having your lats on in a deadlift does
two great things. One, that's a very
strong muscle to stabilize your core.
Two, that action keeps the bar, some
people the barbell when your lats aren't
on, the bar drifts away from your body.
That's very weak position, increases
risk of injury, and it increases the
risk of not being strong in the
deadlift. So, keeping the bar close to
your body with your lats, strong core,
and it keeps the bar in the exact right
position that it needs to be in, which
is where in line with your midoot. So,
the barbell, that's the center of mass.
The strongest position is for it to be
in line with the center of your base of
support. The base of support is your
foot. So, the center of that is your
midoot. And that's where we want to keep
a heavy deadlift. And a lot of people
fail because they don't have the lats on
and it drifts away from that point.
Okay? So, watch me closely. The way that
I get this off the floor is increase my
tension through the body and take the
slack out of the bar. Pause in that
position. And then it's about push the
world away is the cue that I like to
consider. So it's a push, not pull. All
right. So watch this. Bar in line with
my midoot. Normal deadlift setup.
Armpits to pelvis. Reach. Reach my crown
of the head to the ceiling. Big breath.
Now it's time to add more weight. The
beauty of those squats is it takes me a
lot longer to warm up for the squats and
I've spent a lot of time there. So now I
feel like I'm pretty warm. Now I can
take pretty big jumps for this. So I'll
be going the first set was 70, next one
120. And the idea is to go red plate,
red plate up until I feel like it's a
good start point for the program. So
120. I'll do one rep.
Reach down. So long arms. I'm not just
relaxing my arms anymore. I used to say
relaxed arms. Now I say don't relax it.
Reach down. Actively reaching down.
Felt good.
[Applause]
talk of my hands. And this I think is
going to be my last warm-up set. So the
numbers that I thought of coming into
the session was around the 260 mark. So
this is 220. Um it's feeling
comfortable, but uh we'll see. So this
is going to tell me what my next or my
top set is going to be. I'd like it to
be 260. Uh Reese would like it to be
270. He gets upset because if it's 260
the next color is blue. Uh which he
thinks is upsetting, which I agree with,
but I also
have to be real. So remember with my
programming, um I like to start week one
of the program
conservative enough to allow room to be
able to progress from week to week. So I
think let's just say if 260 is my start
point, next week will be 265 and the
week after will be 270. Um, as opposed
to, let's just say I go really, really
heavy today and I go straight for 270
and I'm grinding out. I've left no room
to progress. I could be speaking too
soon and the 260 might leave me there,
but we'll see. Last warm up.
[Applause]
Um, it feels nice actually. It's the
first time I've deadlifted um like a
conventional deadlift using my
quadriceps for the last few weeks
because you know the quadricep tear. So,
I've been doing stiff-legged deadlifts.
So, it's kind of nice to be using my leg
drive again. Um, and yeah, 220 for one.
I I think 260 for a double as my top set
today is reasonable. Um, and I think I
think I've got it. Let's go.
[Music]
I'm happy. Don't you see? Uh, good.
Good. Um, so although I'm h happy but
Reese isn't because there's a blue
instead of a red.
I think it was the right choice. I think
that was tough. Um, but not so tough
that I can't progress next week. I think
that I will have 265 next week and then
270 the week after. And that's what I'm
going to be doing is a top set with some
back down work and my back down work.
I'm going to continue with
stifflegged deadlift. So, my next set is
going to be uh two sets of higher rep
stifflegged deadlift. The idea of top
set back down set is when I'm
deadlifting heavy,
it's a very high RP and if I do multiple
sets of that, uh, that's when it
interferes with the recovery for the
other sessions in the week. But whenever
I do just one top set, I can keep that
at a very very high RP. I would say that
was about an 8 and a half RP,
which means I had like maybe definitely
one more rep in the tank, maybe two.
don't know if it if I didn't give a
about technique and wanted to round my
back and and grind and if there was
money on the table, I probably would
have been able to do two more reps. Um,
but I think that was a perfect start
point. Uh, next up, few back down sets
of a low RP um, Romanian deadlifts. Um,
yeah, I'll see what weight that is. I've
got to beat 200 for eight. So, it's
either going to be 210 for eight. I
think that should be the number, which
is also upsetting, Ree, because that
means it's three reds and one blue to do
210. Can you just face yourself in the
mirror and shake your head exactly how
you're doing it? Uh, this is what Reese
was doing while I was saying 210. I'm
kind of doing that inside as well. I
agree.
But it is what it is. Anyway, stay
tuned. Let's see. Maybe I won't even be
that strong.
All right. Now, as I always do, I like
to look back. I'm always recording my
sets, especially my top set, uh to
critique myself because as much as I
would love to be perfect, I am
absolutely not. So, I felt like the
first repetition was really nice
technique. I'm looking at it going like,
look at the head position. Um, something
I like to cue for the head position is
for me and for most people, find a spot
on the floor about 3 or so meters in
front of you and keep your eyes on that.
Right now, the body follows the eyes. If
you're looking up too high, you'll squat
deeper. So, it encourages a more upright
torso, but that's not how deep you want
to be. You don't want to be upright in a
deadlift, right? So, looking down too
much, I find, makes your hips come up
too high and it makes it too much back.
So, for me, I'd say that's the sweet
spot. Reaching the crown of the head to
the ceiling. Find a spot about 3 m on
the floor in front of you. Now, this is
what I feel like happened. First rep, I
did that. Now, normally I say stay on
that spot, but for me, my my deadlift
floor is warped and if I don't drop it
in the right spot, it'll roll off in a
funny direction. So, I broke my rule and
I changed my focal point and I looked
down to make sure I dropped it in the
right spot so that I could pick it up
from the right spot. And then I'm
looking at it going, unfortunately,
my eye position there, I didn't pick it
up. I maintained the momentum of the set
and I kept my eyes down which caused my
hips to be at very slightly higher
position on the second rep and I feel
that it was more on my back and less on
my legs. Right? So the technique between
the first and the second was not that
different, not that bad. I'm very happy
with it. But objectively, next week, my
focus is to reset, take a little bit
more time for the second rep, and make
sure I bring my focal point back to that
spot, 3 m on the floor in front, so that
my hips can be in the right position,
and it'll be a little bit more
consistent. But overall, um, I'm pretty
happy with that technique. There's no
hitch. Um, there's a pretty smooth
lockout, very good back position,
and, uh, and we're good. One more thing,
I don't know if you recorded from the
side, something that I do with my brace.
Um, I don't say straight back. I don't
want it to be pulled into a rounded
position like a fishing rod. But at the
same time, like have a look at my brace.
Something that I do with my brace is I
bring my ribs down. So, I take a big
breath and push my belly into the belt.
And then that's my start position, which
is not here, which is how I used to be.
I used to think you got to have a
straight back for the deadlift.
But that's not very strong either. So I
want a rigid back and that's what my
goal is. So my brace is here. Bang.
Breathing into the belt. And that's the
position that I would like to keep from
start to finish. So it's not straight
like that. But I consider that to be the
strong position for me. Food for thought
for you. All right. Next up, adios.
All right. So, the consensus was don't
be a coward. Do the four red plates, but
do two less reps. So, there was a bit of
a trade-off. Uh, that was set one. I'm
only going to do two more set. Sorry,
one more set. 2x six. That's plenty. Um,
and then we'll do some back extensions
after that.
That was a lovely feeling right in the
buttock. Um, good. So, sets of 20. Now,
when I say sets, I mean just m one more.
So, two by 20 will be lovely. And that's
my session. Anyway, I hope you enjoyed
our session. uh include your deficit
deadlift with a pause and you are going
to have a strong deadlift off the floor
and a strong deadlift off the lockout. I
hope you enjoyed that. Join me next
time. See you.